f the availability and distribution of this content via the
Internet. More individuals are being arrested for child pornography offenses and appear in clinical or criminal justice settings
(Bates&Metcalf,2007;Motivans&Kyckelhahn,2007;Wolak,
2011). It is very likely, however, that detected offenders representonlythe‘‘tipoftheiceberg’’andthatmostchildpornography
users remain undetected. Data on child pornography traffic in
peer-to-peer computer networks indicate that user numbers
greatly exceed the number of individuals identified by arrest
(Canwest News Service, 2009; Steel, 2009).
This gap between activity and detection is partly because of
limited resources: Internet crime investigations require specialized officers who are familiar with computer and online technologiesandaccesstoforensiccomputeranalysis;smallerpolice
departments often lack such specialized resources (see Baines,
2008). Even with more investigators, however, police inquiry is
more likely to detect and arrest naı¨ve or careless online child
pornography users (Jenkins, 2001). Security techniques such as
file encryption, anonymous email and proxy services, and datawiping reduce the likelihood of discovery. Yet, a national
American study suggested that only 20 % of those arrested for
child pornography offenses used one or more of these methods
(Wolak, Finkelhor, & Mitchell, 2005).
Therefore, most of what we currently know about child pornography use is based on selected clinical or criminal justice
samples(Seto,2013).Riegel(2004)surveyed290self-identified
pedophilesandfoundthat95 %hadviewedchildpornographyat
least occasionally. Similarly, Neutze, Seto, Schaefer, Mundt,
and Beier (2011) recruited 155 self-identified pedophiles and
hebephiles in a novel German prevention campaign and found
that two-thirds had viewed child pornography at some point in
life. In a survey of 307 online pornography users, 30 (approximately 10 %) had ever viewed child pornography (Siegfried,
Lovely, & Rogers, 2008). Finally, among 223 individuals in an
anonymous, non-representative online survey of pornography
use, 41 (18 %) reported viewing child pornography but none had
ever been arrested for child pornography offenses (Ray, Kimonis, & Seto, 2013).
Large, representative community-based studies conducted in
asensitivemannerareneededtoelucidatepopulationprevalence
andprovidelessbiasedcorrelatesofchildpornographyuse.Data
basedonclinicalorcriminaljusticesamplesmightbeaffectedby
considerable selection biases; for example, clinical samples
might be more distressed by their child pornography use or more
likely to have comorbid psychopathology than communitydwelling child pornography users. Similarly, criminal justice
samples may be more likely to engage in antisocial and criminal
behavior than community samples of child pornography users.
Potential Risk Factors for Child Pornography Viewing
In the following sections, we briefly review what is known about
potential risk factors for child pornography viewing, rationally
organized into domains identified in sexual offending research.
Because there is relatively little research on the psychological
characteristics of child pornography offenders, we drew primarily on evidence accumulated from men who committed
offenses involving sexual contact with children to derive our
research hypotheses (Seto, 2008).
Sexual Interest in Children
There is an intuitive and empirically supported link between
pedophilia and child pornography use; many self-identified pedophiles report child pornography use (Riegel, 2004) and a
majority of child pornography offenders show greater sexual
arousal to children than to adults in laboratory assessments
(Blanchard et al., 2007; Seto, Cantor, & Blanchard, 2006).
Similarly, self-reported interest in sex with children (not necessarily pedophilia, as the interest in sex with children could also
reflect curiosity, sensation-seeking or other factors) may be
associated with viewing child pornography.
Excessive Sexual Interest and Behavior
Research on community and clinical or criminal justice samples
suggests that hypersexuality or excessive sexual preoccupation
and behaviors are overrepresented in men who have committed
sexual offenses. Community-based data also suggest that number of sexual partners and interest in casual, multiple sexual contactsdistinguishes sexually coercive men from non-coercive
menandpredictssexualcoercioninlongitudinalresearch(Kjellgren, Priebe, Svedin, & La˚ngstro¨m, 2010; Lalumie`re, Chalmers,
Quinsey, & Seto, 1996; Malamuth, Linz, Heavey, Barnes, &
Acker, 1995). Frequent use of pornography among male adolescents is also associated with increased viewing of child pornography (Svedin, A˚ kerman, & Priebe, 2011).
Personality
Illegal sexual behavior is associated with certain personality
characteristics. Individuals higher on aggressiveness, impulsivity, risk-taking or sensation-seeking are more likely to engage in
both nonsexual and sexual criminal behavior and have earlier
onset of sexual activity, more sexual partners, and more involvement in casual sex (Kjellgren et al., 2010; Lalumie`re, Harris,
Quinsey&Rice,2005;La˚ngstro¨m&Hanson,2006;Seto,2008).
As predicted, sensation seeking was associated with child pornographyviewinginthesurveybyRay,Kimonis,&Seto(2013).
Peer Influences
TheTheory ofPlanned Behavior(Ajzen, 1991,2001) has shown
great utility in explaining many behaviors, including sexual
behavior. Very briefly, behaviors are predicted by intentions to
engageinthebehavior,whichinturnareinfluencedbyattitudes
about the behavior and perceived (or subjective) norms about
the behavior. For example, favorable attitudes towards depictions of adult–child sex and believing (correctly or not) that
peers also hold favorable attitudes should increase intentions
andlikelihoodofviewingadult–childsex.Moregenerally,peer
influences have shown substantial explanatory power in models ofjuvenile delinquencyandyoungadultcriminality (Lipsey
& Derzon, 1998).
Sexual Victimization
Sexualvictimization inchildhoodhasconsistently been found to
be associated with sexual offending among adolescents and
adults in criminal samples (Forsman, Santtila, Johansson, Sandnabba, & La˚ngstro¨m, 2013; Jespersen et al. 2009; Seto & Lalumie`re, 2010) and was moderately correlated with engaging in
Arch Sex Behav
123
sexually coercive behavior in a prior study based on the present
sample (Seto et al. 2010a). However, it remains unknown if it is
also correlated with child pornography viewing. Recently, Babchishin, Hanson, and Hermann (2011) found that child pornography offenders, like contact sexual offenders, were more likely
to have been sexually abused than were comparison subjects.
However, child pornography offenders had lower rates of sexual
victimization than contact sex offenders.
Sexual Behavior Involving Children
Finally, we expected childpornography viewingtobecorrelated
with sexual behavior involving children (Seto, Hanson, &
Babchishin, 2011). It might also be correlated with sexually
coercive behavior more generally, but the latter association
should be weaker than for behavior focusing on childre