The utility of the Internet to spread views and opinions has been
realized both by the advocates of democracy and by racist groups. The
Internet is filled by a multiplicity of variegated commercial and private
users. It is a boon for all sorts of advocacy. Among the views available
for consumption on the Web are those that denigrate people based on
their race, ethnicity, national origin, gender, and sexual preference. Hate
groups take advantage of this relatively inexpensive medium for
ideological distribution. They can spread pamphlets, letters, and images
to groups of users who can anonymously participate in racist meetings,
think tanks, and planning committees. One of the down sides of the
Internet is that it provides a global forum for the advocates of intolerance
and inequality.There has been a steadily increasing number of hate groups with
Internet forums. In 1995, the Simon Wiesanthal Center found that
approximately fifty hate groups had their own electronic bulletin
boards.96 Klanwatch and Militia Task Force, two agencies dedicated to
monitoring racist hate groups, determined that in 1997, with the aid of
the Internet, there was "an all-time high of 474 hate groups in the United
States... , a 20% increase over 1996."97 The number of Internet sites promoting hate and targeting "religious groups, visible minorities,
women and homosexuals" had grown to at least eight hundred by
1999.98 In 2000, during unrest in the Middle East, hundreds of new Web
sites and chat rooms deriding Jews bourgeoned. 99 The Southern Poverty
Law Center, which tracks hate group Internet sites,100 concluded that the
Internet is a medium extensively used by hate groups calling for
intolerance of and violence against outgroups. 1 tt
Groups using the Net to spread their messages include the Ku Klux
Klan and White Aryan Resistance.'02 Their messages are not, in many
cases, new; rather, they rely on age-old prejudices that have proven
effective vehicles for inciting acts of oppression. For example, on its
Web home page, Stormfrontt°? aggressively promotes white supremacy and
nationalism, providing worldwide links to other hate-filled Internet sites and
offering a fairly broad range of anti-Semitic articles, T-shirts, and videos for
sale.4 The Aryan Nation uses biblical passages to justify its racist
dogma. Moreover, the National Observer advocates using "biological terrorism."' Such organizations embellish their propaganda through colorful, interactive Web pages where like-minded people can join their
movements.Many of these groups do not stop at discrimination and prejudice; they recruit Internet users to engage in violent acts against outgroups and to
propagandize white supremacy. 0 8 Notorious among these is the World
Church of the Creator, which calls for a "Racial Holy War" against nonwhites.' The National Socialist Movement sports a swastika logo thereby praising Adolf Hitler on its Web page. n ° The cover of its
magazine exclaims, 'Total War Is the Shortest War!""' It solicits people to
contact the National Socialist headquarters and begin training, presumably
to participate in their preparations for a race war." 2 Patrick Henry OnLine provides an opportunity for interested racists and anti-Semites to
contact and join any one of numerous racist militias. 1 3 The militias, in
turn, prepare their members for a race war.'4 Civil War Two sponsors a racist and anti-Semitic secessionist page.' 15 These Internet sites
advocate and further the violent aspirations of hate groups seeking to
increase their memberships. Some hate groups have even taken to
recruiting children through catchy music and colorful games. 116
All of these disseminated ideas are linked to specific sources. With
the help of technology and Internet Protocols, electromagnetic waves
transmitting hate propaganda can be traced to their place and time of
origin. No matter how often the messages are transmitted, the source
remains the same. Hate groups should be held responsible for the
intended consequences of their Internet communications, regardless of
whether they have already instigated violence or have a significant
probability of later causing violence.