Research into why individuals commit crime when others do not, and to ascertain how
these individuals are different to law abiding citizens is carried out worldwide. Within the
workshop research into the profile and reasons of cyber criminality were discussed
theoretically at length with numerous questions raised;
Do cyber offenders have common demographic characteristics, for example, are they a
particular age? Do only males commit cyber offences? Where do cyber criminals live, rural,
urban? Do they reside in the same country? Do those who specialise in a particular form of
cybercrime live in a specific area? Or is it that these individuals have similar attitudes, for
instance, not believing they have committed a crime or oppose the law? Or do these
attackers have similar motives or a similar skill set.
Answering the above questions and comparing the characteristics of online to offline
offenders will help to establish whether these groups of offenders are different. The results
of such analysis could help in the detection, intervention and punishment of such criminals.
As already noted cybercrime is a unique crime, requiring a new set of skills not previously
needed in traditional crime.
Criminal career research, which is fundamental to criminological study, will enhance our
evidence base on cybercrime.
“The construct of a ‘criminal career’ is a powerful approach for accumulating rich
knowledge about offenders and using that knowledge for developing rational policies
for dealing with crime… The basic thrust of criminal career research is to look at the
characteristics of individual offenders and to use that information for dealing with a
particular individual, but also to look at aggregates of offenders and their collective
characteristics for guidance on how criminal justice policies can best respond to their
offending patterns.” (MacLeod et al. 2012).
Following the formation of longitudinal data on cyber criminals, which is a key component
of criminal career research, we can begin to make inference on cyber offenders’ criminal
careers. Such research considers the impact of age or stage of career, on factors that
influence criminal behaviour and attempts to explain motivations for starting, continuing
and stopping offending. Several features of an offenders’ criminal career can be studied;
onset, duration, frequency, seriousness, escalation, desistance, prevalence, specialisation
and recidivism (see Farrington, 1992; MacLeod et al. 2012; Soothill et al., 2009).
Examining just a few features of an offender’s career can provide a wealth of knowledge, to
illustrate; onset examines the start of an individual’s criminal career, for instance,
establishing the age at which someone begins offending, or the entry offence into their
criminal career. Frequency looks at the occurrence of offences, such as, the number of
cybercrimes reported, prosecuted and convicted. Specialisation investigates how far
offenders focus on certain types of offending, for example, do cyber criminals commit only
cyber offences, which can be extended to whether they commit only one type of cyber
offence or multiple (i.e. phishing, fraud, espionage). Moreover, prevalence looks at the
proportion of the population who are committing offences, for instance the proportion of
cyber criminals in the UK.
Whilst the results will provide valuable information, measuring the varying features of a
criminal career is extremely difficult laying host to a number of limitations, the principal
being the samples true representation. The quality of the data and the information stored
(discussed in ‘Cybercrime Data) restricts the analysis and area of the criminal career which
can be researched. For instance, official data only reveals a limited number of the total
amount of crimes committed. This is due to not all crimes being reported, not all reported
crimes being recorded and not all offenders being apprehended. Furthermore, results 
obtained through the analysis of official crime data will measure the criminal process and
changes within this process along with criminal activity.
