Without question, child pornography is a subject often avoided in both social and research circles because of the
heinous abuses that targeted children face, often for years without being saved. One such case was described in a recent
popular media piece, written by Julia Morgan and entitled, “ruinyrpjs?”
This real-life drama unfolded as follows. A Toronto, Ontario, police officer by the name of Paul Gillespie just
received about 450 images posted on the Internet by an officer in the United Kingdom—images of a little girl being
beaten and raped. In several of the images, there was a hunting knife that was pointed at her, and on her little body were
disgusting slogans like, “Kill me, I'm a slut.” Perhaps one of the most disturbing images was that of the little girl of
about age five or six stuck naked inside a dog cage—with a terrified look in her big brown eyes. She was crying, and
the corners of her mouth were turned downward. Using photo-editing software, Paul Gillespie was able to enlarge the
contents of the images to determine the particulars surrounding the little girl's amusement park wristband and Girl
Scout uniform number. The policeman then went to work using good old-fashioned police work. (Morgan, 2006).
46 B.H. Schell et al. / Aggression and Violent Behavior 12 (2007) 45–63
The photo-enhanced leads eventually suggested that the little girl was a student in North Carolina. In just 36 h, the little
girl was identified. When the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agents found her outside of an upscale house in a
quiet suburban neighborhood, she appeared to be having fun riding on her bicycle. Inside the home was a male relative
who put her through the abuse. During the arrest, FBI agents got five computers with 15 years worth of child porn, as well
as cameras, weapons, a pair of dog cages, a Girl Scout uniform, to name just a few pieces of evidence. The man accused of
the crime, a software developer, was apparently a well-respected citizen. But he was anything but. The relative belonged
to a group of online child pornographers who created and watched “hurtcore”—explicit, hurtful images of children –
younger than 13 and often just a few months in age – who were brutally sexually abused and in obvious pain. The
captured relative of the little girl was not a very nice person. Just before his capture, he had brutally sexually assaulted a
three-month-old male and had hired a fellow pedophile to murder his wife. The FBI agents prosecuting the case said they
classified this man as one of the most evil pedophiles they had ever arrested. (Morgan, 2006)
1.2. What is known about child pornographers
There is no question that the Internet has caused the most explosive growth in child pornography than at any other
time in history. One of the reasons for this explosion is that technology itself has greatly reduced the barrier to entry for
the production and distribution of child porn. Cameras and powerful editing multimedia software are becoming more
affordable and easier to use, simplifying the process of creating and distributing child porn. Child pornography, defined
by federal law in the United States as “a visual depiction of a minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct,” has been
causing harm to children for centuries (Magid, 2002). But the Internet has given child porn new life because of the ease
of transmission from one pedophile to many other pedophiles and from one country to many other countries.
The frightening reality is that at least 80% of those who purchase child pornography are active child molesters.
Moreover, 36% of child pornographers who use the U.S. mail to exploit a child have been found to be actual child
molesters. Child pornographers tend to range in age from 10 to 65 (Posey, 2005).
From a psychological profile perspective, psychologist Kimberly Young and Psychiatrist Alvin Cooper, two
experts who have studied online sexual behavior, maintain that cyber sex (whether it involves minors or not) is a
form of psychopathology and a symptom of neurotic, compulsive behavior. It is, without question, a type of
addiction. Viewed as a type of socio- and psychopathology, cyber child pornography, in particular, is as an element of
unhealthy power relations, whereby an adult abuses minors for his own pleasures. These acts of real-world abuse are
often set into motion by adults having unhealthy sexual fantasies involving minors. For the most part, the cybersupported sexual fantasy fulfillment with minors is found in ritualized practices and fixations, primarily of a sadistic
sort (Uebel, 2002).
Pornography is progressive, besides being addictive, note the experts. As people become desensitized by the porn
they see, they seek out more and more shocking material. It is, therefore, no surprise that child porn is becoming so vile
and so prevalent on the Internet—with at least one-third of Internet traffic comprised of this type of shocking material.
Not only are there pictures of penetrative sex by adults with two-month-old babies, but the Wonderland Club, which
was discovered by the FBI and Scotland Yard in 2001, required prospective members to post 10,000 original images of
child porn. That gives citizens around the world an idea of how many of these images there are in circulation
(McAuliffe, 2001; McCafferty, 2004).
1.3. The depth of the problem
In 2005, TopTenReviews, Inc. estimated that child porn generates over $US 3 Billion annually (Ropelato, 2005),
and over 100,000 Websites exist with the primary purpose of selling it to others, according to customs service estimates
(BBC News, 2001a,b,c). Moreover, about 20% of the youths who frequent the Internet claim they have received sexual
solicitations while online, and 89% of those who engage in online Chat Rooms say they have received such
solicitations. What is quite alarming is that 29% of children aged 7 through 17 who frequently go online say they would
freely give out their email addresses to others—making them ripe targets for online predators (Ropelato, 2005).
According to law enforcement agents, daily pedophiles exploit every aspect of the Internet, sharing children abuse
tips and trading millions of “homemade” movies and photos of suffering children. Police estimate that anywhere
from 25% to 50% of individuals viewing and trading cyber child porn have also committed acts of child sex abuse.
Police further estimate that over 50,000 children worldwide are abused and used as child porn actors. Often, the
B.H. Schell et al. / Aggression and Violent Behavior 12 (2007) 45–63 47
children are bound, raped, and sodomized. Sadly, of this large number of children likely abused, apparently only a
small fraction of them have been identified, and an even smaller fraction have been rescued by law enforcement
officers. Adults engaged in cyber child porn are pleased to learn that many other like-minded adults exist, and they
often utilize this reality to rationalize their own behaviors—which tend to escalate in aggressive acts – to hurtcore –
over time. (Morgan, 2006)
1.4. How authorities learn about cyber child pornographers
Though an increasing number of law enforcement agents like Paul Gillespie are on the lookout for child
pornography and its online perpetrators, many of the cases brought to their attention are reported by Internet users and
Internet Service Providers (ISPs). Also, in 1998 in the United States, the CyberTipline (located at www.cybertipline.
com) was created so that Internet users and ISPs could report online abuses, including cyber child porn and online
enticement of minors to engage in sexual activities. Reports are then forwarded to federal law enforcement agencies,
including the FBI, the U.S. Customs Service, and the U.S. Postal Inspection Service. Enticement of children for sexual
favors is often started by an adult using an online Chat Room to arrange to meet a child—often done in a cunning way
so that the child believes the perpetrator is trustworthy. As of March 2002, the CyberTipline received over 65,000 leads
of online abuse, with the vast majority (over 55,000 leads) being cases of cyber child porn. This Website is maintained
by the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC), with financial assistance from the U.S.
Department of Justice and the U.S. Secret Service (Magid, 2002).
Also, the recipients of the 1998 U.S. Presidential Service Award the CyberAngels online group was founded in 1995
in the United States as the very first cyber-neighborhood watch group. Today, CyberAngels is considered to be the
oldest group of volunteers concerned about the online safety of children and women. Their Website lists their mission
as trying to function as a “virtual 411” safety destination. While supporting the right of free speech, they want to
address parents' concerns about the safety of their children when they go online. These cyber volunteers are on the
lookout 24 h a day, seven days a week for online abusers and cyber criminals. They report suspicious activities to legal
authorities, and they produce documents to help parents assist their children in developing safe online habits
(CyberAngels, 2005).
In 1999, the CyberAngels organization helped locate child pornography sites, resulting in the first-ever set of arrests
in Japan of Internet child pornographers (Karp, 2000).
In other jurisdictions worldwide, cyber child porn detection units can be found. For example, in Canada there are the
Toronto Child Exploitation Unit and at the Ontario Provincial Police (OPP) unit known as Project P. There is also the
www.Cybertip.ca Website, where online users can report cyber child porn, and the advocacy group known as
Canadians Addressing Sexual Exploitation. In the United Kingdom, there is the Internet Watch Foundation, and in
Europe there is the COPINE Project, designed to combat pedophile networks (CBC News, 2003a,b).
Often, law enforcement agents affiliated with these child exploitation units pose as minors in Internet Chat Rooms
(ICR), attempting to snare child porn perpetrators through acts similar to those employed by them to seduce children to
meet them in public places. Many times, law enforcement agents are successful.
One such case occurred in August, 2005, in the Greater Toronto Area (GTA). An Ajax church pastor in the GTA by
the name of Kenneth Symes, aged 36, was charged with attempted to have sex with a child after a man met face-to-face
with whom he thought would be a 12-year-old female he had communicated with online for four months. The gettogether was to occur in a public place in northwest Toronto. He was shocked when the child turned out to be Detective
Constable Scott Purches from the Child Exploitation Section of the Sex Crimes Unit. The detective said that while in
the ICR, the chat became more sexually explicit to the point where the perpetrator said he was willing to drive across
the city to meet the child in a public place. The talks began in a Yahoo Chat room called Teen Oh Canada Chat, a well
used teen Website. The pastor used the name “Garyneartoronto” in nearly forty conversations. He was married and had
one child (Lai, 2005).
Since about 2000, international coalitions of law enforcement agents have worked in a similar manner to crack down
on international cyber child porn rings. A major case in point occurred on August 8, 2001, when U.S. legal authorities
arrested over 100 people for subscribing to an Internet site blatantly selling child porn. Authorities then said that they
had cracked the largest child porn ring ever discovered. The Internet Website had more than 250,000 subscribers and
was run from Texas, through operations in Russia and Indonesia. The child porn was also distributed through regular
post (BBC News, 2001b).
48 B.H. Schell et al. / Aggression and Violent Behavior 12 (2007) 45–63
The main culprits behind the online cyber child porn ring were a married couple from Texas, Thomas Reedy (aged
37) and his wife Janice, who worked as the company bookkeeper. The pair ran a company called Landslide Promotions
and earned as much as $US 1.4 million a month on the operation—an indicator of how profitable the Internet can be as
a distribution vehicle for child pornographers (BBC News, 2001b).
For two years, the company brought in almost $10 million in revenues, and both adults running the company
drove Mercedes sports cars. During the police raid on their home, police seized dozens of computers and several
servers, which led authorities to a list of 300,000 customers in 37 U.S. states and 60 countries. Subscribers to the
Website paid about $30 with each access to the child porn Websites. It is interesting to note that since the couple
did not produce the material – they acted as the middlemen, providing a Website to advertise pornographic material
that was published in Indonesia and Russia – they did not believe they were doing anything illegal. The downfall
came in the Reedy case when in April, 1999, several people complained to authorities about coming across his
Website and noticing child porn. Calling his email address Houdini, Reedy openly advertised what he was selling
on his web page: “Click here for Child Porn.” In August, 2001, Thomas Reedy was sentenced to 1335 years in
federal prison on 89 counts, including conspiracy to distribute child pornography and possession of child
pornography. His wife Janice, who was convicted on 87 counts, received a prison sentence of 14 years. On appeal,
Thomas' sentence was reduced to 180 years in prison, because the judge agreed that the original penalty was too
harsh (CBC News, 2003b).
1.5. Social and legal issues surrounding online pornography and child pornography
In both a social and a legal sense, it is important to differentiate between online child porn – which is illegal in the
United States and elsewhere – and online adult pornography—which is not necessarily illegal, unless the contents
exceed the community's standard.
1.6. Adult pornography and child pornography
In short, adult pornography is deemed by most jurisdictions in North America and in Europe to be sexually-explicit
material engaged in by “consenting adults.” This type of material, for example, is protected in the United States by the
First Amendment. What this means in real terms is that though a number of Websites, online newsgroups, and
unsolicited email messages may offer adult pornography that is offensive in nature to many online viewers, these online
venues are typically not in breach of the law. Though children may be portrayed in rather offensive poses, the models
used by these adult porn Websites are typically over age 18 (Magid, 2002).
According to recent 2005 statistics, there are about 4.2 million pornographic Websites—about 12% of the total
Websites in existence. The size of the pornography industry is about $US 57 billion worldwide-bringing in more
revenues than the ABC, CBS, and NBC television networks combined, and more than the football, basketball, and
baseball sports franchises combined. In 2005, over 40 million adults (72% male, 28% female) said that they regularly
visited adult pornography Websites, and 20% of the men surveyed said that they regularly view pornography online
while at work (Ropelato, 2005).
While laws against child pornography in the United States and in other jurisdictions worldwide have been designed
and passed to protect children from exploitation, the reality is that children themselves often choose to go to adult
pornography sites while online. According to recent 2005 statistics, the average age of a child's first exposure to online
pornography is 11, the largest consumers of online pornography are in the age group 12-through-17, and 90% of 8-
through-16-year-olds have viewed pornography online-most, they admit, while doing their homework. What is
alarming is that about 29% of the 7-through-17-year-olds said that they would give out their home addresses to others
while online (Ropelato, 2005).
1.7. Commonalities between the internet and the 1980's dial-a-porn
It is important to note that while the Internet may be charged by parents and by lawmakers as being an overly
accessible route to children to view pornographic materials, back in the 1980s, “dial-a-porn” telephone services had the
same allegations. Briefly, these telephone services offered sexually-explicit messages, live or prerecorded, for a fee. As
a result of its popularity, “dial-a-porn” telephone services angered many parents when there were dramatic increases in
B.H. Schell et al. / Aggression and Violent Behavior 12 (2007) 45–63 49
their telephone bills—often brought on by a keenness to listen to the explicit sexual messages by their own children and
their friends. Too, parents were angered at their children's easy access to dial-a-porn content. As a result of public
outcry, the U.S. Congress acted quickly to create a specific criminal offense to control dial-a-porn services. But after a
decade of court hearings and complex interactions between the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the
courts, and Congress, the United States was finally able to achieve a comfortable resolution to the dial-a-porn issue
(Mashima & Hirose, 1996).
For example, to respond to the negative allegations of the “dial-a-porn” telephone services by its citizens, in 1983,
U.S. Congress amended the Telecommunications Act to stop the dissemination of obscene or indecent commercial
television services in interstate or foreign communications to minors under age 18. The amended Act imposed stiff
penalties of fine, imprisonment, or both for violations of the Act. Then, one year after the Act's passage, the FCC said
that dial-a-porn services could only be conducted between the hours of 9 PM and 8 AM to prevent children from seeing
the potentially harmful material, and that payment by credit card (presumably, an adult's) had to be received before a
sexually-explicit message could be sent. However, a court case was immediately launched on the grounds that this
ruling was infringing on adults' freedom of information rights, and the Federal Appeals Court for the Second Circuit
invalidated this time-of-day restriction, finding that the FCC could have adopted some other alternative that did not
severely restrict free speech. So, in 1985, the FCC proposed a new idea: dial-a-porn content providers could transmit
sexually-explicit content only to callers using an access code or personal identification code (PIN)—available only to
adults (Mashima & Hirose, 1996).
A Second Circuit court heard an appeal questioning the legality of the new regulation in areas served by New York
Telephone, where implementing the access code restriction was not feasible because of a one-way, non-interactive
system. As a result, the FCC again amended its approach, adding another defense: message scrambling plus credit card
payment, with sales of decoders limited to adults by state law. Then in 1988 – an election year – Congress said that it
would explicitly prohibit not only “obscene” content in dial-a-porn messages but “indecent” commercial telephone
communications directed to anybody regardless of age, including adults—in essence, a total dial-a-porn ban. In 1989,
another U.S. Supreme Court case ensued; it continued with its distinction between indecency and obscenity by
upholding the ban on “obscene” interstate commercial telephone transmissions but rejected the ban on “indecent”
telephone messages. In the end, Congress amended the Act not to prohibit but to regulate “indecent” telephone
communications. In 1990, the FCC adopted final regulations to establish defenses to prosecution under the Act: credit
card authorization, use of PIN codes, and scrambling of transmissions (Mashima & Hirose, 1996).
1.8. The legal objectives of online child pornography legislation
Turning now to online child pornography, it is clear that punishing perpetrators of the act involves a classic legal
balancing act between safeguarding minors and preserving the information rights and freedoms of adults. In short,
lawmakers in North America and in Europe have generally attempted to weigh the protection of children from sexual
exploitation against the protection of free speech and free thought. In the United States, the latter are protected under
the First Amendment, and in Canada, the latter are protected under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
The general problem, as exemplified in the U.S. dial-a-porn illustration, is that if lawmakers lean too far one way, the
courts will strike down the law, affirming that it infringes on the rights of citizens. If the lawmakers lean too far the
other way, legal authorities and the police will maintain that they are being hampered in their fight against cyber
criminals by “toothless laws” when trying to catch and convict, say, cyber child pornographers.
Added to this debate is the reality that in the United States, in Canada, in South Africa, and elsewhere around the
globe, often as a reaction to some heinous crime to innocent children, laws are hastily passed to stop and convict
criminals, including cyber pornographers. Moreover, because technology is continuing evolving, so do the laws that
pertain to technology, including the Internet.
1.9. A closer look at Canadian cyber child porn legislation
For example, Canada's Criminal Code outlines penalties for various crimes, including those of a cyber nature. In
1993, the Criminal Code was amended to create a new prohibition order-lasting up to a lifetime—to prevent convicted
child sex offenders from visiting any place where children tend to be: day-care centers, school grounds, playgrounds, or
public parks. The order also prohibited convicted child sex offenders from seeking or keeping paid or volunteer
50 B.H. Schell et al. / Aggression and Violent Behavior 12 (2007) 45–63
positions of trust or authority over children. Another provision was created to allow an adult to obtain a peace bond
(i.e., a protective order lasting up to one year) if he or she feared that another adult would commit a sexual offence
against a child. Also, in May 1997, Bill C-27 amended the Code to allow for the prosecution in Canada of Canadian
citizens or permanent residents who sexually abused children while abroad. In September, 2000, Canadian federal,
provincial, and territorial justice ministers proposed an amendment to the Criminal Code making it an offense to use the
Net to lure children for criminal purposes. Then, less than two years later, the Canadian government enacted Bill C-15
A in July 23, 2002. It brought into force child exploitation laws dealing with two main issues: Child pornography on the
Internet and using the Internet to lure children (Department of Justice Canada, 2002).
In short, today's amendments to the Criminal Code address the reality of new technologies. Lawmakers have added
to the list of possible banned activities the use of the Internet to communicate with children for sexual purposes. These
amendments also include crimes related to child porn and Internet-luring as offences for which an offender would be
subject to either a prohibition order that could last up to one's lifetime or a one-year peace bond. The changes also mean
that child pornography and luring offences are added as offences for bringing an application for an offender to be
designated as a “long-term offender.” An individual such designated can be made subject to community supervision
lasting up to 10 years. The Criminal Code now defines “child porn” as “a photographic, film, video, or other visual
representation, whether or not it was made by electronic or mechanical means…that shows a person who is or is
depicted as being under the age of 18 years and is engaged in or is depicted as engaged in explicit sexual behavior…or
the dominant characteristic of which is the depiction, for a sexual purpose, of a sexual organ or the anal region under the
age of 18 years…or any written material or visual representation that advocates or counsels sexual activity with a person
under the age of 18 years…”(Department of Justice Canada, 2002).
It is important to note that the child pornography law was rushed through Canadian Parliament in fewer than six
weeks, and it became law on June, 23, 1993, after which Parliament adjourned for the summer. Even the Members of
Parliament who helped frame it said it was a hastily-passed piece of legislation that was overly broad, with little thought
given to the protection of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Before leaving for the summer, certain Members of
Parliament said that if the Act did not pass the test, then it could be corrected later on.
1.10. Legal cases testing Canadian child porn legislation
The first case to test the 1993 child porn piece of legislation was a February, 2000, case in which a Toronto artist by
the name of Eli Langer, age 27, was charged under the new law for his showing of paintings of individuals having sex.
Some appeared to be young males under age 18. The judge hearing the case ruled that the works had “artistic merit,
“and the charges were dropped. However, the Ontario government used a forfeiture application to seize the work as
being “child porn,” with the intent of destroying it. At the end of the deliberations, the paintings were returned to
Langer (CBC News, 2006a,b).
Another highly contentious child porn case that made it to the Supreme Court of Canada in January, 2001, involved
perpetrator John Robin Sharpe, aged 67, a retired city planner living in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, who was
charged with possessing child porn in 1995. The man was found to have pictures of boys under age 14 engaging in
sexual acts. He also had a collection of his own stories involving sexual acts of minors, entitled, “Kiddlie Kink
Classics.” Two lower British Columbia courts had acquitted Sharpe of the charges, citing the Charter of Rights and
Freedoms. The Supreme Court upheld most of the law, but found that adults cannot be prosecuted for producing written
or visual materials or works of their own imagination – no matter how sexually explicit – for their own use. The
Supreme Court of Canada then sent the Sharpe case back to the BC Supreme Court for retrial in January, 2002. In
March, 2002, the Court found the accused not guilty of possessing written child porn, but Sharpe was found guilty on
two counts of possessing pornographic pictures of children. He was later sentenced to four months of house arrest. Two
years later in March, 2004, Sharpe was found guilty of a separate charge of indecent assault. These charges were
grounded in an incident that took place twenty years ago involving a 14-year-old hitchhiker. Sharpe was acquitted of
the second charge of sexual assault (CBC News, 2006a,b).
It is interesting to note that in December, 2002, the Canadian federal government proposed new legislation
removing the defense of artistic merit in cases of works of imagination involving sexual acts of minors, with the
material being judged in the courts on whether it contributed to the “public good”—the standards of society. Arts
groups said that it would place an unfair burden for artists working on “edgy areas,” including controversial movies like
“The Boys of St. Vincent,” which dealt with the abuse of boys in a Canadian orphanage. The bill to amend the
B.H. Schell et al. / Aggression and Violent Behavior 12 (2007) 45–63 51
definition of child porn, therefore, died on the ledger when the 2004 election was called. Of interest, during that
election, public outcry to toughen the Criminal Code was related to the criminal case of Michael Brier, a pedophile
murderer of 10-year-old Holly Jones. The accused admitted that his fantasy about having sex with minors was
increased by his engaging in Internet child porn (CBC News, 2006a,b).
1.11. Summary of the legislative issues
In summary, there is little question that how one defines pornography – adult porn or child porn – depends to a large
degree on how one views it. Literally, the word pornography means “the graphic depiction of whores.” Dines has said
that from a historical function, any product produced for the primary purpose of facilitating male arousal and
masturbation can be deemed pornographic (Morgan, 2003).
Throughout history, including the recent past, religious conservatives have defined pornography as being
immoral, while anti-pornography feminists view pornography as liberating, particularly in terms of sexual freedom.
This definitional conflict is, without question, at the heart of the problem of pornography. Is it protected speech –
at least in some forms – or is it a violation of human equality rights—particularly if children are involved in sexual
acts with adults? Lawmakers and legal authorities have generally taken the view that pornography can be seen as a
record of harm in its production—specifically to children and women, and more recently, to non-dominant males
(Adams, 2004).
Pornography is not simply words that may offend some in society but records of acts—causing harm and pain to
unwilling victims. For example, in pornographic images, anal intercourse is usually depicted without any use of
lubricant on the victims. Moreover, while pornography's clientele may have changed over the past 30 years of
women's lib to include women, the primary target audience of pornography in 2006 is males. Some women's groups
have argued that males showing females pornography as a sexual aid to better sex must, instead, be viewed as a form of
“grooming” behavior. The latter is a term describing how a child sex abuser uses various techniques, including showing
porn to children, to lower their defenses and to get them to accept the sexual acts as “normal” rather than “abnormal” or
“abuse.” In closing, many questions remain regarding the definition of and legal applications to pornography, in
general, and child porn, in particular. Can sexuality and sexual practices, for example, be separated from the
construction of gender or age? Moreover, when an act is sexual, is it harder to see the harm that it represents to targets
other than the intended audience? These are key aspects of the debate that seems to be ongoing, regardless of the
evolution of technology (Adams, 2004).
1.12. Laws passed in the United States and elsewhere for curbing online child pornography
How Canada has made recent amendments to its Criminal Code to curb online child pornography has just been
discussed. Other jurisdictions over the past six years have taken similar steps. Key among these has been the United
States and European nations.
In the United States, crimes committed over the Internet place in the general category of “cyber crimes,” because
they are committed in cyber space and involve breaches of privacy, security, and trust. Therefore, harm resulting from
these acts over the Internet can be to either persons or to property. There are also technical non-offenses, for which in
the North America context, no legislation declares the acts as unlawful – such as hacktivism – whereby an individual
uses a computer or computer networks to advance one's political agenda (Brenner, 2001, June).
1.13. Criminal liability elements and harm to persons
For old-fashioned or Internet crimes to occur, Anglo-American law bases criminal liability on the coincidence of
four elements (Brenner, 2001):
• A culpable mental state (the mens rea).
• A criminal action or a failure to act when one is under a duty to do so (the actus reus).
• The existence of certain necessary conditions or “attendant circumstances.” With some crimes, it must be proven
that certain events occurred, or certain facts are true, in order for a person to be found guilty of a crime.
• A prohibited result, or harm to property or to person.
52 B.H. Schell et al. / Aggression and Violent Behavior 12 (2007) 45–63
Most U.S. states and the federal government outlaw the possession or distribution of pornography. The obscenity
statutes make it an offense to knowingly display obscene materials. Cyber porn uses a computer to display and/or
distribute obscene materials.
Thus, the four elements of criminal liability for cyber pornography, in general, can be described as follows: the actus
reus is displaying obscene materials using a computer; the mens rea is doing so knowingly; the attendant circumstances
are that the material is obscene; and the harm is the dissemination of obscenity over the Internet. Moreover, with child
porn, U.S. statutes state that it is an offense to either knowingly possess material that visually or aurally depicts a child
under age eighteen engaged in sexual activity, or to bring or cause such material to be brought into the state, or
distribute such material in the state, or publish or otherwise issue such material with the purpose of distributing it in the
state (Brenner, 2001).
Thus, the four elements of criminal liability for cyber child pornography, in particular, can be described as follows:
the actus reus is possessing, importing, distributing, publishing, or otherwise issuing child pornography using a
computer; the mens rea is knowingly possessing or purposefully importing, distributing, or issuing child pornography;
the attendant circumstances are that the material is child porn; and the harms are that minors are used to create child
porn, and that child porn is disseminated through the Internet to those finding it appealing and stimulating (Brenner,
2001).
Internet child sex offenders use a variety of commonly available technologies,
such as social networking sites and peer-to-peer platforms, to abuse children.
• Offenders are a diverse group when it comes to how they perceive risk and act on
those perceptions. The risk perceptions and risk management behaviours of
individual offenders can be dynamic.
• In the period surveyed by this review (2000–11), some studies found that
surprisingly few offenders used technological measures to protect their identities.
KEY WORDS: internet; encryption; child pornography; offender; child sexual abuse
The internet is a significant resource for child sex offenders. Some
offenders use the internet to facilitate non-contact offences, such as
Correspondence to: Myles Balfe, Department of Sociology, University College Cork, Safari Building,
O’Donovan’s Road, Cork, Ireland. E-mail: mylesbalfe@rcsi.ie
Myles Balfe*
Department of Sociology, University
College Cork, Cork, Ireland
Bernard Gallagher
Helen Masson
Centre for Applied Childhood Studies,
University of Huddersfield, UK
Shane Balfe
Internet Security, Deutsche Bank,
London, UK
Ruairi Brugha
Department of Epidemiology, Royal
College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin,
Ireland
Simon Hackett
School of Applied Social Sciences,
University of Durham, UK
‘Internet child sex
offenders use a
mixture of new and
old technologies to
abuse children’
‘Surprisingly few
offenders used
technological
measures to protect
their identities’
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Accepted: 23 July 2013
Child Abuse Review Vol. 24: 427–439 (2015)
Published online 18 February 2014 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com) DOI: 10.1002/car.2308
downloading child pornography; others for grooming children; and still others
use it to network with like-minded individuals (Beech et al., 2008; Doring,
2000; Elliott and Beech, 2009; Gallagher, 2007; Schell et al., 2007).
The internet also provides offenders with a degree of anonymity that they
can use – or at least feel that they can use – to avoid detection or thwart
investigation. However, although the internet has significant advantages for
offenders, it can render some of them more vulnerable to being traced than if
they abused offline (Wolak et al., 2011).
To date, there has been a significant amount of research done on the
intrapersonal characteristics of internet sex offenders (the ‘sex offender’
component of ‘internet sex offenders’) (Nielssen et al., 2011), but
researchers, such as Dombrowski and Gischlar (2007) and Prichard et al.
(2011), have noted that there is little research on the ‘internet’ component.
There is a particular lack of research on the strategies that offenders use to
evade detection by law enforcement agencies (Holt et al., 2010). To help to
begin to address this gap, the authors conducted a review of the peerreviewed literature on internet child sex offending (published between
2000 and 2011) to examine what is known about these individuals’
attitudes towards online security and their use of identity protection
techniques and technologies. The review sought to answer the following
questions: What internet technologies do child sex offenders use to abuse
or exploit children? How conscious are internet sex offenders of the need
to protect their identities when they engage in online abuse activities?
And what technologies and tactics do offenders use to manage the risk
of surveillance?
There is an increasing number of organisations involved in responding to
the threat of internet child sexual abuse (ICSA). Law enforcement agencies
have been at the forefront of this response. These agencies have
subsequently been joined by groups concerned with (a) offender treatment,
(b) the provision of internet services and (c) agencies involved in the
support of children and families. National governments also play a key role
in this response, especially in terms of enacting legislation to criminalise
particular behaviours or to permit law enforcement monitoring of internet
use. There is an increasing pressure upon some of these organisations, in
particular those providing internet services, to establish a more effective
response to ICSA. All of these organisations need to be aware of the
way in which child sex offenders use the internet, if they are to address
this problem. This, however, is a challenge, given the minimal amount of
research in this area. It is, in light of this fact, essential that full use is
made of those data that do exist. It is the aim of this review to highlight
the key messages from the research to date in order that all of those
concerned with child protection on the internet are more informed as to
the manner in which offenders use the internet to bring about child sexual
abuse (CSA).
The raison d’être of this review is then, in essence, to facilitate evidencebased practice. This is of most immediate relevance to law enforcement, others
involved in the criminal justice system (such as prosecutors and probation
staff), along with those charged with treating internet child sex offenders.
This review draws together what is known about the technology that offenders
use to perpetrate their crimes, the specific purposes to which they put these
‘An increasing
number of
organisations
involved in
responding to the
threat of internet child
sexual abuse’
‘This review draws
together what is
known about the
technology that
offenders use’
‘There has been a
significant amount of
research done on the
intrapersonal
characteristics of
internet sex
offenders’
428 Balfe et al.
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Child Abuse Rev. Vol. 24: 427–439 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/car
technologies and the ways in which they use this technology to manage risk.
Possession of this information will enable these agency workers to have an
enhanced understanding of both the character and behaviour of offenders.
Armed with this knowledge, agency workers should be better equipped to
tackle the challenges that offenders present.
Method
The authors searched Pubmed, Web of Science, Psychinfo and Inspec using
combinations of the terms: child pornography, indecent image, sex offender
(refined with the addition of the keywords: internet, technology, encryption,
peer-to-peer (P2P)), grooming (refined with the addition of the keywords:
internet, sexual abuse), sexual abuse (refined with the addition of the
keywords: internet, technology, encryption, P2P). A total of 689 peer-reviewed
articles were identified through this initial keyword database, of which 40 were
included in the final review.
To be included, articles either had to address the topic of internet sex
offenders’ technology usage, or the subject of sex offenders and identity and
anonymity on the internet. The key reasons for excluding articles were: (a)
their subject matter was unrelated to the topics of interest to this review; (b)
they focused solely on offenders’ non-technological characteristics; (c) they
focused on technologies that offenders could potentially use, but did not
discuss how sex offenders either used or understood these technologies; and
(d) they were review or editorial articles that did not provide additional
information beyond what could be obtained from original research articles.
The authors included only peer-reviewed articles that were written in English
and published between 2000 and 2011. Time and resource constraints meant
that the authors were unable to undertake a systematic search of government or
police reports on this topic; however, we have included two reports from 2012
that provide additional insights and background information about the problem.
What Internet Technologies Do Child Sex Offenders Use to Abuse or
Exploit Children?
Offenders use a variety of common technologies to exploit or abuse children,
including email, instant messaging, web cams, bulletin boards and 3G phones
(Beech et al., 2008; Gallagher, 2007; Mitchell et al., 2011). A number of
offenders continue to use technologies that the general public has largely
moved away from, such as newsgroups and chat rooms (Mitchell et al.,
2010a; O’Halloran and Quayle, 2010). P2P file-sharing seems to be commonly
employed by child pornographers, particularly by younger offenders
(Kierkergaard, 2011; Latapy et al., 2011; Sheehan and Sullivan, 2010; Steel,
2009; Stola et al., 2009; Wolak et al., 2011). In fact, some researchers have
argued that the vast majority of paedophile activity on the internet now occurs
on P2P platforms (Kierkergaard, 2011). Recent studies also suggest that
offenders are increasingly using social network sites to engage in child abuse
activities, especially for grooming-related offences (Mitchell et al., 2010a;
Quayle and Taylor, 2011). It is unclear why offenders value and use particular
technologies; however, theoretical research on how people learn about
‘The authors searched
Pubmed, Web of
Science, Psychinfo
and Inspec’
‘Two reports from
2012 that provide
additional insights
and background
information’
Internet Sex Offender Use of Identity Protection Technology 429
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Child Abuse Rev. Vol. 24: 427–439 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/car
technology suggests that familiarity with the specific technology, the
technology’s ease of use and its perceived usefulness for offenders’ goals
may be important factors (Venkatesh and Davis, 2000).
Offenders value the internet more generally for its accessibility, affordability
and, perhaps most importantly of all, anonymity (Beech et al., 2008;
Dombrowski et al., 2007; Graham, 2000; Mitchell et al., 2005a). The internet
should, however, be regarded as more of a pseudoanonymising technology
rather than a fully anonymising one. Many individuals on the internet can be
traced if the tracer has the time and resources to do so (Latapy et al., 2011).
For example, IP (internet protocol) addresses (identifiers assigned to each
device in a computer network) can be automatically logged by programs,
websites or peers in P2P file-sharing networks, which can lead the police to
an offender’s location (Liberatore et al., 2010; Wolak et al., 2011). The police
in some countries frequently use the internet’s anonymity to run online ‘sting’
operations, creating false sexually suggestive personas that will attract offenders
(Briggs et al., 2011; Mitchell et al., 2010b; Urbas, 2010). The truth is that
offenders’ identities can be discovered on the internet and the web is potentially
a risky environment for them (Bourke and Hernandez, 2009; Mitchell et al.,
2010a, 2011). Eneman (2009), drawing on the work of Michel Foucault, argues
that the internet is a panoptican environment for child sex offenders, that is an
electronic landscape where they are under constant risk of surveillance.
How Concerned Are Internet Sex Offenders About the Risks of Being
Detected While Engaging in Online Abuse Activities?
Foucault’s work would suggest that given this panoptican context, offenders
would become highly concerned about the risk and avoid engaging in
behaviours that might facilitate detection by law enforcement. However, the
empirical research indicates that offenders’ awareness of internet-related risk
exists along a continuum. Some offenders, such as individuals who are
engaged in contact offences and those who are embedded within internet
paedophile networks, are aware of risk and feel that they are – or at least could
be – under surveillance from law enforcement agencies (D’Ovidio et al., 2009;
Eneman, 2009; Holt et al., 2010; Ray et al., 2010; Sheehan and Sullivan,
2010). Conversely, other researchers have noted that a proportion of internet
sex offenders appear to be relatively insensitive to detection risk (Beech
et al., 2008; Briggs et al., 2011; Glasgow, 2010). Indeed, even offenders who
are concerned about detection risk can display variable risk awareness, or a
variable inclination to act on their risk perceptions (Eneman, 2009).
Factors That Influence Sex Offenders’ Online Perceptions of Risk
A number of studies have identified factors that could underlie and modify
offenders’ perceptions of internet-related risk.
Demographic Factors
Age might be one risk-related variable, with some studies finding that some
young people are ‘immature’ and ‘foolhardy’ (Zhang, 2010) in relation to
assessing the risks stemming from the creation and distribution of (often
‘Offenders value the
internet more
generally for its
accessibility,
affordability and,
perhaps most
importantly of all,
anonymity’
‘An electronic
landscape where they
are under constant
risk of surveillance’
‘Even offenders who
are concerned about
detection risk can
display variable risk
awareness’
430 Balfe et al.
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Child Abuse Rev. Vol. 24: 427–439 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/car
self-generated) indecent images (Kierkergaard, 2011; Quayle and Taylor,
2011). Wolak et al. (2008) note that offenders with higher education levels
and higher social statuses are sometimes less concerned about detection risk
than offenders with less education and who are from lower socio-economic
backgrounds, often because they lack criminal experience and suspicion of
law enforcement (Wolak et al., 2008).
Psychological Factors
Offenders who have problems with emotional dysregulation have been found
to act spontaneously and often without regard to future consequences when
using the internet (Elliott and Beech, 2009). Internet-generated feelings of
deindividuation can influence risk-taking perceptions amongst internet sex
offenders (Prichard et al., 2011). Individuals who access child pornography,
or interact with children, in a sexually aroused state may minimise the
perceived risk of detection (Prichard et al., 2011). Some offenders appear to
have an optimistic bias (Eneman, 2009), feeling that while offenders in general
are likely to be detected, they in particular are not. A significant proportion of
chat room offenders have mental health and substance abuse problems; it
seems plausible that individuals with these issues would have problems
assessing risk in certain circumstances, or that their risk perceptions could vary
according to their mood or substance use (Briggs et al., 2011).
Social Factors
Being a member of a paedophile forum or network where security concerns are
regularly identified and shared can encourage risk awareness amongst some
offenders (Eneman, 2009; Holt et al., 2010), as can high-profile media
coverage of police raids on offender networks (Holt et al., 2010).
Technological Knowledge
Offenders with specialised knowledge of internet technologies and computer
science may have a greater appreciation of computer-related risk than offenders
without this knowledge (Eneman, 2009).
What Technologies and Tactics Do Offenders Use to Manage the Risk of
Detection When Engaging in Child Abuse Activities?
Offenders can use a variety of different strategies to manage the risk of
detection.
Identity Protection Technologies
A number of offenders use encryption technologies to protect their identities.
Armstrong and Forde (2003) note that ‘paedophiles are obviously skilled in
the use of encryption…as well as the practice of internet anonymity’ (p. 212).
Kierkergaard (2011) observed that some paedophile forums on the internet are
‘heavily encrypted’, and Seto et al. (2010) found that 80 per cent of a small
sample of offenders (n = 20) attempted to hide child pornography content
through the use of encryption. Offenders in Eneman’s (2010) qualitative study
used a variety of technologies, particularly proxy servers, to remain anonymous
‘A significant
proportion of chat
room offenders have
mental health and
substance abuse
problems’
‘A number of
offenders use
encryption
technologies to
protect their
identities’
‘Offenders with higher
education levels and
higher social statuses
are sometimes less
concerned about
detection risk’
Internet Sex Offender Use of Identity Protection Technology 431
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Child Abuse Rev. Vol. 24: 427–439 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/car
when downloading child pornography content. Some offenders involved in
grooming children use virtual private networks located in other countries to
hide their internet traffic (Webster et al., 2012).
In contrast to these findings, however, the largest peer-reviewed study of
detected child pornography offenders’ identity protection technology usage
(Wolak et al., 2011) found that only three per cent of 604 detected offender
cases used encryption (it is unclear whether this figure refers to hard disk or
network traffic encryption), and that the proportion of offenders who used
encryption appeared to have declined between 2000 and 2006 (the most recent
time period looked at by the study). In fact, Wolak et al. found that only 19 per
cent of their sample used any technical means, including passwords, to hide
their child abuse activities. Why more individuals in Wolak et al.’s study did
not take more technological steps to protect their identities is an interesting
question. It may be that they used (ineffective) non-technological means. It
may also be that encryption and other security and anonymisation technologies
are used by only a proportion of technologically proficient offenders, and that
most individuals who access child abuse content do not know how to use it, or
think that the ‘anonymity’ of the internet is sufficient to guarantee their safety.
These individuals may think that their risk of being detected is small.
Deindividuation caused by internet use may encourage impulsive and
disinhibited behaviour in some child pornography offenders (Prichard et al.,
2011), and the use of identity protection technologies may be less likely when
individuals are in this state. Webster et al. (2012) were involved in a study of
internet groomers where they found that the offenders who were least likely
to use identity protection measures were hypersexual men who were almost
completely behaviourally unregulated and unconcerned about risk and naive
‘intimacy seekers’ who felt that they had nothing to hide or be ashamed of
about their behaviour. These latter individuals did not employ identity
protection technologies because they felt that the use of these technologies
would signify that they were doing something ‘wrong’. For these individuals,
not taking steps to protect their identities from discovery appeared to be an
identity-preserving measure, one that enabled them to interact with children
without experiencing cognitive dissonance. Even offenders who do use identity
protection technologies sometimes do so ineffectively, for example, attempting
to format a hard disk but leaving substantial child abuse material on it
(Wardwell and Smith, 2008).
Disposable Technologies
Some offenders use dedicated computers and smartphones, separate from their
regular computers or phones, to access child abuse content (Holt et al., 2010).
This means that if the offender feels that he has come to the attention of the
police he can quickly dispose of the technology without becoming significantly
inconvenienced (Holt et al., 2010; Webster et al., 2012).
Pseudonyms
Individuals involved in child pornography or grooming offences can establish
fake identities, for example, employing pseudonymns in chat rooms or on
forums/social network sites, or sometimes even pretending to be children
‘The use of identity
protection
technologies may be
less likely when
individuals are in this
state’
‘Some offenders use
dedicated computers
and smartphones,
separate from their
regular computers or
phones’
‘The proportion of
offenders who used
encryption appeared
to have declined
between 2000 and
2006’
432 Balfe et al.
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Child Abuse Rev. Vol. 24: 427–439 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/car
themselves (Graham, 2000; Holt et al., 2010; Webster et al., 2012). A
paedophile forum member in Holt et al.’s (2010) study advised other forumites
‘don’t put any real personal stuff in your online profile’ (p. 17). Despite this,
offenders sometimes reveal a surprising amount of real-life information in their
internet ‘handles’ such as details about their real-life names, initials,
occupations and birthdates (Briggs et al., 2011).
Private Communication and Distribution Channels
Offenders can seek to control risk by establishing private communication and
distribution channels between themselves. These may be (although they
are not limited to) private, restricted chat rooms or private P2P trackers
(Kierkergaard, 2011) that are not publicly advertised; information about
these channels is passed on only to trusted others. Private communication
channels can also be established behind more public (sometimes legal)
websites, including social network sites; for example, offenders can join
mainstream social network sites and then use the private message functions
of those sites to communicate with one another about child abuse-related
matters (Mitchell et al., 2010a).
Avoiding High-Risk Environments
Offenders can manage danger by avoiding what they consider to be high-risk
macro- or micro-internet environments. On the macro-scale, offenders often
host child abuse material on servers that are located in developing countries
in order to take advantage of those countries’ lax laws around the possession
and distribution of child pornography (Kierkergaard, 2011; Steel, 2009). On
the micro-scale, Mitchell et al. (2005b) argue that undetected offenders might
avoid child abuse websites, or sexual chat rooms, because they know that these
sites are the most likely to be patrolled by the police. These offenders may
instead focus on accessing images of children, or making contact with
children, via non-sexual sites or chat rooms. Offenders can also avoid websites
and individuals who they feel could fall under the jurisdiction of their national
police force: a UK-based child pornographer in Sheehan and Sullivan’s (2010)
study noted ‘the whole time I had been online I had purposely avoided people
from the UK because I was scared of police basically’ (p. 153). Offenders can
access child abuse content from anonymous venues such as internet cafes; this
means that if the IP address of the venue is traced, then the trail will not lead
back to them personally. However, it is unclear whether a significant number
of offenders engage in these kinds of evasive tactics; 77 per cent of offenders
in Wolak et al.’s (2011) study accessed child pornography from their home
computer, and another three per cent from their work computers.
Offender Groups
Some internet offenders who are actively involved in child abuse activities
develop structured networks with like-minded others (Beech et al., 2008).
These groups use many of the security tactics noted to this point (Elliott
and Beech, 2009; Stola et al., 2009). Groups are somewhat different
from individuals, however, in that they sometimes establish formal,
sophisticated security policies, though some groups may be lax about doing
‘Offenders can seek to
control risk by
establishing private
communication and
distribution channels
between themselves’
‘Offenders can
manage danger by
avoiding what they
consider to be highrisk macro- or microinternet environments’
‘Groups… sometimes
establish formal,
sophisticated security
policies’
Internet Sex Offender Use of Identity Protection Technology 433
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Child Abuse Rev. Vol. 24: 427–439 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/car
so (Briggs et al., 2011; D’Ovidio et al., 2009; Eneman, 2009, 2010;
Graham, 2000; Holt et al., 2010; Kierkergaard, 2011; Schell et al., 2007).
Graham (2000) highlighted the security protocols that were used by members
of the paedophile website the Wonderland Club, which forced all new members
to (a) provide 10 000 unique images of child pornography, (b) be sponsored by
existing members of the group and (c) be subject to a formal credibility
review by a membership committee. Some groups will also force members to
use technologies that the group administrators consider to be secure
(Eneman, 2009).
While the strategies employed by groups such as Wonderland (e.g. forced
sharing of images) help to maintain network security, they are also potentially
risky for the individuals wishing to join those groups. The person who is
supplying child abuse material cannot know for sure if the people with
whom he is interacting are other offenders or the police. They also cannot
know what other offenders will do with any uploaded child abuse material.
As a result, some offenders refuse to share their images (Sheehan and
Sullivan, 2010). Others do take this risk, either because they perceive that they
can gain status within the group or because they feel that the rewards of sharing
images (for instance, access to other offenders’ images) are greater than the
risks of doing so (Gallagher, 2007).
Offenders often reveal risky personal information once they have joined a
group and begun to interact with other group members, often despite the
exhortations of group administrators (Eneman, 2009; Gallagher, 2007). When
joining a paedophile network, an offender enters a social environment where he
can obtain positive feedback, positive reciprocity and emotional congruence,
perhaps for the first time in his life (Holt et al., 2010). Research on non-internet
sex offenders suggests that the longer an offender spends interacting with these
kinds of online ‘support’ networks the greater his likelihood will be of
disclosing information about himself (Whitty, 2002). Offenders can also
inadvertently reveal clues to their real-life locations simply by the way that they
spell certain words when communicating with other group members
(Eneman, 2009). Offenders’ tendency to ‘leak’ personal information may be
counterbalanced to an extent by the fact that group members often monitor
each other’s behaviour to ensure that they are being sufficiently secure
(Eneman, 2009).
Paedophile Web Forums
Some offenders join paedophile discussion groups or forums where they can
discuss their sexual interest in children. These sites usually do not require
members to reveal any personal information about themselves.
Site administrators often emphasise to members the need to avoid engaging
in any activity on the forum that would draw the attention of law enforcement
(D’Ovidio et al., 2009). When group members post links that could be
considered legally risky such as to images or videos of children,
administrators often require that multiple proxy links be supplied below each
link (Holt et al., 2010). Some individuals who discuss possible child abuse
activities on these forums frame their activities as ‘dreams’ that they once
had (Holt et al., 2010). Therefore, they are not stating that they actually
engaged in any illegal activity. As with active offender groups, members of
‘Some offenders
refuse to share their
images’
‘Administrators often
require that multiple
proxy links be
supplied below each
link’
‘Offenders can also
inadvertently reveal
clues to their real-life
locations’
434 Balfe et al.
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Child Abuse Rev. Vol. 24: 427–439 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/car
paedophile discussion forums often monitor each other’s behaviour. When a
forum member in Holt et al.’s (2010) study informed the group that he was
thinking of meeting a boy who he had met over the internet, another forum
member noted that the person was getting himself into a very high-risk
situation: ‘Man, this is dangerous, dangerous, dangerous territory. I hate to
burst your bubble, but you should realize that the probability is VERY high that
you’re talking to the police’ (p. 17).
Individuals Who Abuse Children for Commercial Profit
Some researchers have argued that sex offenders will not pay to access child
abuse images because of concerns about security risks (i.e. their credit card
information will be seized by the police) (D’Ovidio et al., 2009; Sheehan and
Sullivan, 2010), though it may be that research has not kept up with practice here.
Some offenders appear to have stopped paying for child abuse content with
traceable currencies, and have instead switched to using anonymous payment
systems (Nytimes, 2013). The individuals who actually run commercial child
pornography sites – who are often organised criminals (Kierkergaard, 2011) –
can use a number of tactics to protect their identities. One is to use a botnet, which
is a collection of compromised computers (bots) controlled by a remote
command and control infrastructure (Elliott, 2010). Individuals running botnets
(called ‘botherders’) use a technology called fast flux DNS (domain name system)
to sell services to individuals who wish to host child abuse content on the
compromised computers. The child abuse content will be hosted on a certain
subset of the bots. However, the domain name of the child abuse site will point
to a different subset of bots in the bot network every minute, making it difficult
for law enforcement to trace the exact location of the child abuse content and the
individuals running the site (Elliott, 2010). Some offenders advertise children for
sale, for sexual abuse, over the internet, but a proportion are subsequently
apprehended in undercover police investigations (Mitchell et al., 2011). How these
offenders decide which ‘clients’ can be trusted and which cannot is also unknown.
Offenders Who Wish to Contact Children over the Internet
Individuals who seek to make contact with children over the internet, or those
seeking to upload recordings of their own abusive actions, would seem to be
taking greater risks than individuals who are solely consumers of child abuse
material (though we recognise that some non-contact offenders are also involved
in undetected contact offences and questionable real-life activities such as
travelling to countries known for sex tourism (Bourke and Hernandez, 2009;
Niveau, 2010). These individuals can attempt to control risk in several ways.
These offenders may be sufficiently manipulative that they are able to move
burgeoning online relationships with children offline, aware that online
interactions may carry more risks of being detected than ‘real-life’ interactions
(though some offenders only pursue online interactions with children)
(Wolak et al., 2008). They may seek to move internet communication with
the child to a more private communication medium such as email
(Webster et al., 2012). Offenders often seek to remotely control the child’s
physical environment, for example, by asking the child if the offender will be
overheard by the child’s parents, or by blackmailing or threatening the child to
‘Some offenders
appear to have
stopped paying for
child abuse content
with traceable
currencies’
‘How these offenders
decide which ‘clients’
can be trusted and
which cannot is also
unknown’
‘Offenders often seek
to remotely control the
child’s physical
environment’
Internet Sex Offender Use of Identity Protection Technology 435
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Child Abuse Rev. Vol. 24: 427–439 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/car
keep quiet (Kierkergaard, 2011; Olson et al., 2007). Before transmitting identifiable
information to a child (such as a picture of themselves), some offenders also take
steps to verify the child’s identity. However, offenders’ risk management strategies
can be naive or foolish. For example, chat room offenders seeking to groom children
have been reported asking undercover police officers if they are ‘under cover girls’
(Briggs et al., 2011) and social network offenders interested in meeting children for
sex have been reported looking at the ‘child’s’ Facebook profile, not considering
that the police could also have generated that profile (Mitchell et al., 2010a).
Discussion
This is the first study to review what is known about internet sex offenders’ use
of identity protection techniques and technologies, and the factors that might
influence offenders’ perceptions of online risk. The review found that offenders
use a mixture of new and old (relatively speaking) internet technologies to abuse
children. Offenders’ perceptions of the risks of using these technologies appear
to exist along a continuum. Counter-intuitively, given the seriousness of the
consequences for them if they are detected, many offenders do not appear to
take steps to protect their identities (Wolak et al., 2011), but a proportion do,
and these offenders can be quite sophisticated in terms of the countermeasures
that they use to combat risk.
There are a number of limitations and gaps in the existing research literature that
need addressing. Research on the factors that influence offenders’ perceptions of
online risk is very limited (especially research on the perceptions of unsecure
offenders), despite the work identified in this article. Although no studies have
examined the relationships between offenders’ perceptions and their security
behaviours (Holt et al., 2010), there is likely to be a correlation here
(Brewer et al., 2004). This research would suggest that the offenders who have
the greatest risk-related concerns would be the most likely to employ antisurveillance measures. This makes intuitive sense. However, Brewer et al.’s
research, and similar work in the health field, is interesting as it suggests that once
people take actions to combat risk, their concerns about risk can subsequently
decrease. This implies that some offenders who employ security countermeasures
may subsequently become less concerned about risk, increasing the likelihood that
they would make a security mistake that would render them vulnerable to detection.
Furthermore, just because an offender uses a counter-surveillance measure does
not mean that measure is sufficient for the threat that the offender is
facing (as demonstrated by studies such as Briggs et al., 2011). The use of
counter-surveillance technologies may therefore give some offenders’ the illusion
of security rather than true security, and encourage them to engage in excessively
risky practices.
The fact that so many offenders do not appear to take technological steps to
protect their identities (Wolak et al., 2011) or freely or inadvertently provide
information about themselves (Briggs et al., 2011) is notable, particularly
given the catastrophic social and legal consequences for them if they are
detected (Gallagher, 2007). A number of offenders likely believe that the
‘anonymity’ afforded by the internet is sufficient to protect their identities.
Others may be careless or impulsive individuals, or believe that the internet
is an unreal place where their actions have no real-world consequences, and
‘Offenders use a
mixture of new and
old internet
technologies to abuse
children’
‘The use of countersurveillance
technologies may
therefore give some
offenders’ the illusion
of security’
436 Balfe et al.
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Child Abuse Rev. Vol. 24: 427–439 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/car
therefore there is no need to protect against these consequences (Webster et al.,
2012). Interpreted via the concepts of the sociologist Erving Goffman, many of
these individuals likely see the internet as a ‘back-region’, a fantasy space
where they are free from surveillance. These individuals fundamentally
misunderstand that the internet is potentially a giant panoptican, a surveillance
machine. However, Wolak et al.’s data are seven-years old. Since their data
were generated, concerns about government and corporate surveillance of
society have gone mainstream in Western nations (Quayle and Taylor, 2011).
It is probable that many more people are aware now that they are being tracked
every time they go online than would have been the case in 2006. In Goffman’s
terms, they are aware that the internet is a ‘front-region’. Sex offenders are part
of the population like everyone else and it is likely that awareness of
surveillance risk has increased amongst sex offenders since the mid-2000s.
Indeed, recent police reports indicate that offenders’ use of encryption and
darknet technologies may have increased substantially in the past several years
(Child Exploitation and Online Protection Centre, 2012). CEOP estimates that
almost half of UK-hidden internet use now involves paedophile activities.
A number of research and practice implications stem from the findings of this
review. There is a need: to investigate the factors that offenders use to determine if
particular technologies, individuals and websites can be trusted or not; and to use
this research to refine online sting operations. We still do not know, for example,
how an offender assesses if a particular social network profile is actually that of a
child’s, and can be safely approached, or a police officer’s, and needs to be
avoided. To disrupt feelings of perceived anonymity amongst unsecure offenders,
it could be useful to have messages ‘pop-up’ every time that a person enters a
child abuse-specific search term (see Steel, 2009, for a list of these terms) into
a search engine or P2P platform (Prichard et al., 2011). This message could
say that, for example, Google or the person’s internet service provider has
recorded the search together with the person’s IP address, or put warnings up
saying that particular torrent or websites are being actively monitored by the
police and technology companies for child abuse discussions/content.
Conclusion
Internet sex offenders are heterogeneous in terms of how they assess risk and also
in how they use technologies such as encryption to protect their identities. For
some offenders, identity protection is not a priority; for others, however, detection
risk is a significant problem that they are actively attempting to solve. A major
research programme is needed to investigate offenders’ use of technology, and in
particular their use of identity protection technologies. At this point, we have a
fairly good understanding of why offenders perpetrate CSA; we now need to know
more about how they use technolog